+++
date = '2026-02-08T15:59:34Z'
draft = true
title = 'Masterdon Records'
+++


On the similarities of withdrawing status in the UK & US:

- 1952 Immigration and nationality act allows for an alien to be deported if the Secretary of State has reasonable ground to believe would have potentially serious adverse foreign policy consequences for the United States is deportable.
- 1995, US tried tpo deport a mexican official and was struck down by Trump's sistser. 
- discussion of  S.40(2) BNA 1981. 
- Both the US and UK laws are used when a politician: the Secretary of state in the US and the Home Secretary in the UK wish to use them. Both laws inherently involve political judgments. Both laws have the potential to permit human rights abuses. Both laws have been used to commit human rights abuses
- Deprivation of immigration status, opens up a new legal regime in most countries. One where human rights are felled at best or completely alien at worst. A lesser legal regime. Why? Because those subject to it are the 'other'. So we permit our governments to treat them as if they have lesser rights. As if they are lesser human beings.
- Things in common between both countries laws:  1- They are both examples of the weaponisation of immigration law, as I discussed above. 2- They both involve attempts to jurisdiction shop.
- Jurisdiction or forum shopping is where a party seeks to have their case heard in the most favorable court to their case.  This is different from seeking the proper jurisdiction for a case to be heard. The latter is about ensuring the correct procedure and expertise is applied to a case. The former is an abuse of the legal process because it seeks to gain an unfair advantage.
- Any time the state brings a case, they already have an unfair advantage because it will always have more power and resources than the average person (large multinationals are of course an an exception to this general rule). The principle of 'equality of arms' meaning equal access to effective legal representation is meant to remedy this. But it can only go so far.
- With that background power imbalance, I turn to discuss how the Trump administration is jurisdiction shopping in the examples I have discussed above. With regard to those detained under the 1952 law, 4 of the 5 people I have named are have been detained in one state in the US, immediately removed to another and then finally moved to a state with favorable judges to the Trump administration (typically in the South of the US).
- Often this means that their lawyers file a habeas petition in the state their client is first removed to but their clients immigration case is heard in the third state with favorable judges. This means hiring at least 2 different groups of lawyers, which is expensive.
- It also means a judge in the habeas case can order the person be released but because they aren't in that state anymore (and the Trump administration not following court orders), it will be difficult to enforce the court order. Also because the 1952 law is based on the secretary of states discretion, immigration judges are generally taking the Trump administration at their word and ordering that these people remain detained vs giving them immigration bail.
- By splitting the legal cases so to speak, the Trump administration is making it near impossible for these people to have their rights respected. None of those detained under the 1952 law are accused of violence, they all had immigration status and there is no indication any of them would flea the US. Under 'normal circumstances' they would get bail.
- Now to turn to those who were detained and set to El Salvador: The Trump administration is detaining these people because they are members of MS-13 or Tren de Aragua. Both have been certified as terrorist organisations by the Trump administration. Therefore, trump is sending them to a terrorist detention facilities (CECOT) in El Salvador with the co-operation of that countries president: President Bukele.
- The US supreme court ruled that those who were sent to El Salvador (around 300 people so far) must challenge their detention via Habeas. The problem is Habeas petitions must be filed in the place they are detained. Some of these men didn't even get lawyers until they were outside the US. That's assuming we even know who they are (Trump's white house won't provide a list of names).
- Even where Habeas petitions were filed in the US (prior to a person being removed to El Salvador) and judges issued temporary orders to prevent them being removed, the Trump administration removed them anyway. Yes this is illegal, but the courts cannot enforce their own orders. The US marshals enforce court orders. They are part of the executive branch which is..... controlled by Trump.
- The conditions in CECOT are awful. They likely violate the Convention against Torture. So Trump, is in effect facilitating the torture of people removed from the US for being terrorists. And when its challenged? The Trump administration says they aren't responsible because its happening in El Salvador.
- So in effect, by using rules on jurisdiction, Trump is getting away with torturing people. This has happened before. Famously, the US sent people they believed were terrorists or knew information about Al Qaeda after 9/11 to various Arab and North African regimes to be tortured so they could find out the information they knew.
- One of those men, Binyam Mohammed  was tortured in Morocco. His captors repeatedly beat him, sexually assaulted him slashed him with a razorblade. They also threatened to electrocute him. The Americans claimed they were not responsible because it was the Moroccans that tortured him.  Despite the fact that they sent him there knowing he would be tortured. Eventually Mr Mohammed was sent to and detained in Guantanamo bay.
- Trump is doing something similar today, sending people to CECOT knowing what will happen to them.
- Trumps policies also bear resemblance to Guantanamo in other ways: 1- Guantanamo was outside the jurisdiction of normal American courts.  2- The majority men detained in Guantanamo-so called terrorists- were not actually terrorists. Most had never been a member of Al Qaeda. The same is true of those detained in CECOT- they are not gang members or criminals. Just ordinary people trying to live their lives in the US.
- Why is this comparison especially terrifying? In the first legal challenge to Guantanamo, Rasul v Bush, the US supreme court ruled the men detained their had the right to challenge their detention via Habeas. A right that is being eroded for those sent to El Salvador and those detained under the 1952 law permitting removing immigration status from people who are national security threats.
- This is not merely using the preexisting different legal regime for those without immigration status. One with less rights protections. This is an attempt reduce those rights protections even further. To deny these human beings nearly all rights because they were deemed either a 'terrorist' so implicitly a threat to national security or an explicit threat to national security.
- In legal literature there us a term called a legal grey hole. David Dyzenhaus refers to as legal grey holes as questions of law which courts do have the capacity to review but they  exercised their capacity so lightly  that it is essentially meaningless. The Trump administration, through forum shopping, immigration law and certifying people as national security threats is expanding the legal grey which gained prominence due to Guantanamo and the black site program.
- Trump is exploiting the language of national security so people are willing to accept what they would otherwise view as unacceptable. Why? it is a proven method. It worked for Bush with Guantanamo. In many ways a legal grey hole is worse than a black hole. The law itself is being used to permit abuses of basic rights of human beings. No judge wants to be accused of being responsible for an act of violence because they prevented the executive's response to a national security threat.
- In the best of the legal tradition, the law is a tool used to prevent abuses of power and as a result human beings. In the worst of the legal tradition, the law is used to perpetuate abuses of power and as a result human beings. This is the worst of the legal tradition. And the law itself is ill equipped to combat it.

Suspension of Habeas in US:
- Quote from Stephen Miller (white house advisor): “The constitution is clear, and that of course is the supreme law of the land, that the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus could be suspended in time of invasion. So that’s an option we’re actively looking at. A lot of it depends on whether the courts do the right thing or not,”
- The writ of habeas corpus has only been suspended four times in US history, most notably by Abraham Lincoln during the civil war. It was also suspended during efforts to fight the Ku Klux Klan in the 19th century in South Carolina, in the Philippines in 1905 and in Hawaii after Pearl Harbor.
- Habeas is the reason we know about Guantanamo. Let me introduce you to Bush v Rasul: This was a joint case between Shafiq Rasul and Mamdouh Habib challenging the lawfulness of their detention in Guantanamo. Each of the filings alleged that the government had not allowed the detainee to speak at all to friends, family or lawyers, and had not given him any hearing whatsoever on the question of whether he was an enemy combatant in the war.
- The first court to hear their case rejected it. Eventually Al Odah v. Bush ( a case representing the interests of 12 Kuwaiti men in Guantanamo) was joined to Bush v Rasul. It then reached the US supreme court.
- The US government argued Guantanamo was in Cuba and outside the jurisdiction of the US therefore the court couldn't hear the case. The court heard it anyway. They found the men had the right to challenge their detention as Habeus jurisdiction existed over all places under the sovereign's control. That included Guantanamo.
- To quote Gareth Peirce who represented a number of the men detained in Guantanamo in legal cases in the UK as well as the many individuals falsely convicted of terrorism during the troubles: The argument that won in Bush v Rasul was "prisoners... should have access to legal remedies and to lawyers who could, most importantly of all, for the first time go in and, bit by bit, bring out reports, not just of the physical and mental horrors inflicted by or on behalf of Americans, but the complicity of this country (at every level) in their unlawful captivity We were never mean to know any of this."
- We know this because of Habeus Corpus. Without it, we would not know the names of the 800 men detained there. The men might still be there if it wasn't for Habeus because the campaigns to end Guantanamo may never have started.

Update to habeus thread:
- There is a further update. Stephen Miller (Trump's advisor) has said the courts that hear Habeus cases do not have jurisdiction to hear such cases as they are linked to immigration and those courts have no jurisdiction over immigration law.
- Habeus makes no distinction based on the reason for detention. It applies in all cases where the government is detaining a person.  They are attempting to create a legal black hole- a place without law for immigrants so they can send them abroad to be subject to mass human rights abuses.
- As mentioned in a prior thread, David Dyzenhaus refers to as legal grey holes as questions of law which courts do have the capacity to review but they  exercised their capacity so lightly  that it is essentially meaningless.
- They are trying to covert a legal grey hole into a legal black hole. From a place where law is meaningless to a place where law does not exist. A place where the capacity to challenge the government does not exist.
- The court cannot enforce its own orders, it relies on the executive. The chief of the executive in the US is the president: Donald Trump.
- This in essence means access to law is no longer a right, it is a privilege. That's not democracy or a state that believes in the rule of law. That is totalitarianism. Or as Elie Mystal would say: There is not a coming constitutional crisis in the US. We are in a constitutional crisis. America, in his view, is a fascist dictatorship.

Starmer quoting Powell:
- Enoch Powell (16 June 1912 – 8 February 1998) was a British politician, scholar and writer. He served as Member of Parliament (MP) for Wolverhampton South West. He is best remembered for his Rivers of Blood Speech as mentioned by Taj Ali. Polls in the 1960s and 1970s showed that Powell's views were popular among the British population at the time.
- In November 2010, the actor and comedian Sanjeev Bhaskar recalled the fear which the speech instilled in him as a brown person: "At the end of the 1960s, Enoch Powell was quite a frightening figure to us. He was the one person who represented an enforced ticket out, so we always had suitcases that were ready and packed. My parents held the notion that we may have to leave."
- The british writer and broadcast journalist of Guyanese descent Mike Phillips recalls that it legitimised hostility, and even violence, towards black british people
- The speech looms large in the minds of every person of colour and every immigrant of that generation.  A terrifying reminder, that the majority did not believe that they belonged in this country. From inside the cabinet. From a minister. Those people of colour, taught their children about this speech. And their grandchildren, a reminder of their greatest fear: that no matter what they did, they did not belong here and they would have to leave.
- The first thing I thought when I read the white paper: this sounds like Powell. Most believed no mainstream political leader would dare allude to the speech again. Or if someone did, it would be a Conservative. We was wrong. Instead it was the former human rights lawyer turned prime minister: Kier Starmer.

starvation and gaza:
- Tom Dannerbaum middle east eye interview is the start.
- He wrote an article comparing starvation as a method of war as societal torture. He argues that the comparison is apt because it allows us to understand why starvation as a method of warfare is a distinct crime. In particular he argues:
- Indiscriminate uses of force are unlawful. You have to target combatants even if the intention is not to kill civilians but rather to kill combatants. If we don't accept this justification in the context of use of force we shouldn't in the context of starvation because starvation as a method of war, involves starving a people to starve the combatants. It should be noted that combatants a will be the last to starve because they have the ability use violence to obtain food.
- Some argue starvation is it is gradual whereas use of disproportionate force results in immediate death. Essentially they highlight the temporal gap between the act causing starvation and death via starvation as a justification. This is problematic because:
- Starvation is not harm neutral, civilians are being denied sustenance causing grave harm to them.
- This policy is a deliberate effort to break the will of civilians to oppose the belligerent party inflicting harm on them. 
- Starvation causes society as a whole to collapse because it causes people to abandon higher order commitments, meaning everything and everyone they care about, to make the pain, starvation, stop. This has happened in every famine throughout history.
- This is comparable to torture because people will do anything, say anything to make the torture stop. 
- Torture is never justified on the basis that it doesn't kill. Instead it is strictly prohibited and condemned because of its dehumanising effect.
- In Danneenbaum's words the key feature of both torture and starvation as a method of war is that both: 'turn [people's] body against their souls' Therefore starvation as a weapon of war is societal torture because it is creating the same effect on people as torture just on a mass scale.




Bartov on genocide in gaza:
- Democracy now interview in july 2025
- In the piece he clearly states again, that Israel's actions meet the legal threshold for genocide and lists a large number of eminent genocide scholars in this area that agree with him.  However, he noted that Holocaust scholars have been reluctant to come to this conclusion. Some have even gone so far to alleged the accusation is antisemitic.
- At the end he expresses his fear that because of this decision, the holocaust return to an event in history commemorated in a regional way by Jewish people as it was in the past rather than an event of global importance as it has become today, and as it should remain in my view. This is similar to the question facing many international legal scholars.
- Raphael Lemkin, coined the term genocide. He was a Polish lawyer who lost 49 relatives during the Holocaust. He learned of the Armenian genocide as a young man and that genocide alongside the acts committed by the axis powers including the genocide of Jewish people and crimes committed against other peoples inspired his life work: accountability for the worse crimes human beings can commit namely genocide and crimes against humanity.
- After emigrating to the US, he coined the term genocide, a combination of two words:  genos (meaning family, clan, race) and cide (meaning killing). He drafted the genocide convention which eventually became law in 1951. He also worked extensively on accountability for Crimes against Humanity. For more on the work of Lemkin and another Jewish lawyer Hersch Lauterpacht who coined the term Crime against Humanity, see the book East West Street.
- At the end of his life, Lemkin believed his work has failed "The fact is that the rain of my work fell on a fallow plain," he wrote, "only this rain was a mixture of the blood and tears of eight million innocent people throughout the world. Included also were the tears of my parents and my friends."
- However, many years after his death, his work and the convention he drafted would re-emerge. In a recent interview William Schabas, stated that at the time the use of the word genocide to describe the Rwandan genocide was controversial, largely because little work has been done since the death of Lemkin regarding genocide in international law.  It was a choice based on instinct for Schabas and others but the mass killing of 800,000 people clearly met the requirements of the convention.
- Today, it is irrefutable, what happened in Rwanda was genocide. The same is true of the genocide in Srebrenica in 1995. These horrific events led to the re-emergence of Lemkin's work. His work remains relevant today because of an increase in scholarship in this area and the horrific events in Myanmar and Gaza, both of which are subjects of litigation under the genocide convention before the ICJ.
- M Gessen, in an interview about their essay titled In the Shadow of the Holocaust which received alot of backlash, stated: 'I believe that to deliver on the promise of "Never Again," we have to constantly be checking to see if we are once again sliding into the darkness, which I believe is something that's happening in Gaza today.'
- They went onto say: 'And I think that we have a moral and one could also argue, legal obligation to compare the Holocaust and the atrocities committed during the Second World War to the present.'
- With reference to the legal obligations, Gessen has made the argument that international law including the definition of genocide itself is based in part on the Holocaust and the Nazi's crime. In their view, any time we international legal standards to determine whether an event since 1945 is unlawful, we are engaging in a comparison of the nature they described in the interview I quoted above.
- In that way, the holocaust remains relevant, a cornerstone of how we understand international law and its origins. In this way, Lemkin's work was not a complete faliure, he just did not live long enough to see it. The question for us today is whether the future will finally fulfill his life's mission and that of so many others? Or in other words is the plain where the rain of his work fell truly fallow?
- I hope for a better world, where the answer is no. His work mattered. Where the blood and tears of the millions who suffered during the Holocaust and all others born too soon to benefit from the protection of international law matter. Where the tears and blood of those who've suffered because they did not benefit from the protection of international law despite its existence, matter. Where one day, international law will finally live up to its promise.

Additional thread to ^:
- Bartov in interview with middle east eye- Since then, he has given an interview where he, likes M Gessen, compares what is taking place in Gaza to the holocaust. 
- He states that at least 3 of the 5 acts that are capable of constituting genocide, according to the genocide convention, are taking place in Gaza. He goes onto say that he generally does not analogies between other genocide's and the Holocaust because:
- 1- The Nazi's actions are often worse than the perpetrators of other genocides, which can lead some people to conclude those genocides don't look as bad, which is not the case. 2- The requirement for a finding of genocide is not that it looks like the holocaust, but rather do the acts by the perpetrator meet the definition in the international convention. 3- The emotive response of such comparison does not help to explain what is taking place.
- However, both Bartov and Amos Goldberg have said the situation in Gaza 'appears quite similar to say the situation in ghetto's in 1940 before the final solution began, that is concentrating people under inhumane conditions, depriving them of food, of water of sanitation and decimating that population in part through so-called natural causes because you don't give them food and water and medical help" This is similar to the comparison made by M Gessen discussed in my thread linked above.
- Goldberg is a professor in the Department of Jewish History and Contemporary Jewry at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem who concluded Israel's actions were genocide in October 2024
- Bartov goes onto state in that interview, that the genocides in Gaza also bears resemblance to other genocides in the 20th century because many genocides began as ethnic cleansing, an attempt to remove and unwanted population, that turned genocidal after people refused to leave their home, could not leave and no body would take them in. In particular: The holocaust, The Armenian genocide, The genocide in South West-Africa committed by Germany.
- As mentioned in my thread, Lemkin's definition of genocide was based on both the Holocaust and Armenian genocide.  Alongside the overwhelming evidence proving that the requirements for genocide in the convention are met, the close resemblance between events in Gaza and those genocides makes it near impossible to deny what is happening in Gaza is genocide.
- There are dozens of reasons by describing what is taking place as genocide is important but non more-so than those highlighted by Palestine in their application to intervene in the genocide case brought by South Africa: ‘The purpose of the Genocide Convention is to “safeguard the very existence of human groups”' ‘The urgency of these proceedings… seek nothing less than protecting the survival of the Palestinian people at a time when their existence is under threat


NOTE TO SELF: WRITE ABOUT THIS: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zMo9MrLsNCw&t=3625s

This too: https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/Ammori-v-SSHD-Approved-Judgment-300725.pdf

